Docs overhaul (#431)
cmu-delphi/epipredict: vignettes/backtesting.Rmd

---

```{r, include = FALSE}
source(here::here("vignettes/_common.R"))
```

Backtesting is a crucial step in the development of forecasting models. It
involves testing the model on historical time periods to see how well it generalizes to new
data.

In the context of
epidemiological forecasting, to do backtesting accurately, we need to account
for the fact that the data available at _the time of the forecast_ would have been
different from the data available at the time of the _backtest_.
This is because
new data is constantly being collected and added to the dataset, and old data potentially revised.
Training and making
predictions only on finalized data can lead to overly optimistic estimates of accuracy
(see, for example, [McDonald et al.

> (2021)](https://www.pnas.org/content/118/51/e2111453118/) and the references

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2021](https://www.pnas.org/content/118/51/e2111453118/) and the references
```

  ) +
  geom_line(
    data = percent_cli_data |> filter(geo_value == geo_choose),
    aes(x = time_value, y = percent_cli, color = factor(version)),
    inherit.aes = FALSE, na.rm = TRUE
  ) +
  facet_grid(version_faithful ~ geo_value, scales = "free") +
  scale_x_date(breaks = "2 months", date_labels = "%b %Y") +
  scale_y_continuous(expand = expansion(c(0, 0.05))) +
  labs(x = "Date", y = "smoothed, day of week adjusted covid-like doctors visits") +
  theme(legend.position = "none")
```
</details>

```{r show-plot1, warning = FALSE, echo=FALSE}
p1
```

The version faithful and un-faithful forecasts look moderately similar except for the 1 day horizons  
(although neither approach produces amazingly accurate forecasts).

In the version faithful case for California, the March 2021 forecast (turquoise)
starts at a value just above 10, which is very well lined up with reported values leading up to that forecast.
The measured and forecasted trends are also concordant (both increasingly moderately fast).

Because the data for this time period was later adjusted down with a decreasing trend, the March 2021 forecast looks quite bad compared to finalized data.

> The equivalent version un-faithful forecast starts at a value of 5, which is in line with the finalized data but would have been out of place compared to the version data.

Author: So it's a bit confusing to talk about, because you never actually want to score against versioned data. If you could somehow wave a wand and make the predictions generated by the finalized data in real time, you would much prefer those to the versioned ones. But you can never make those forecasts. The point is that the performance advantage of the faithless forecasts is a mirage, and you're deceiving yourself if you believe their scores.

I guess my original phrasing didn't emphasize this element enough. Pushing the conclusion until after both data is presented is definitely reasonable.

> The equivalent version un-faithful forecast starts at a value of 5, which is in line with the finalized data but would have been out of place compared to the version data.

Reviewer 2: Taking another stab at this section. I like the "mirage" wording.

> The equivalent version un-faithful forecast starts at a value of 5, which is in line with the finalized data but would have been out of place compared to the version data.

Reviewer 2: Okay, I modified this only a little in https://github.com/cmu-delphi/epipredict/pull/431/commits/44396be339909c4f549b87d5d5ddb29d1b9974bd. Still not sure if our message is clear.

> The equivalent version un-faithful forecast starts at a value of 5, which is in line with the finalized data but would have been out of place compared to the version data.

Reviewer: Food for thought, do we even really want to demonstrate un-faithful forecasting?
We can just reference published work that says it's bad and do only the version
faithful case.

  geo_values = "ca,fl,ny,tx",
  time_values = epirange(20200601, 20211201),
  issues = epirange(20200601, 20211201)
) |>
  # The version date column is called `issue` in the Epidata API. Rename it.
  rename(version = issue, percent_cli = value) |>
  as_epi_archive(compactify = TRUE)
```

In the interest of computational speed, we limit the dataset to 4 states and 

> 2020-2021, but the full archive can be used in the same way and has performed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2020&ndash;2021, but the full archive can be used in the same way and has performed
```

example, here is a plot that compares monthly snapshots of the data.

<details>
<summary>Code for plotting</summary>
```{r plot_revision_example, warn = FALSE}
geo_choose <- "ca"
forecast_dates <- seq(from = as.Date("2020-08-01"), to = as.Date("2021-11-01"), by = "1 month")
percent_cli_data <- bind_rows(
  # Snapshotted data for the version-faithful forecasts
  map(
    forecast_dates,
    ~ doctor_visits |>
      epix_as_of(.x) |>
      mutate(version = .x)
  ) |>
    bind_rows() |>
    mutate(version_faithful = "Version faithful"),
  # Latest data for the version-un-faithful forecasts
  doctor_visits |>
    epix_as_of(doctor_visits$versions_end) |>
    mutate(version_faithful = "Version un-faithful")
)

p0 <-
  ggplot(data = percent_cli_data |> filter(geo_value == geo_choose)) +
  geom_vline(aes(color = factor(version), xintercept = version), lty = 2) +
  geom_line(
    aes(x = time_value, y = percent_cli, color = factor(version)),
    inherit.aes = FALSE, na.rm = TRUE
  ) +
  scale_x_date(breaks = "2 months", date_labels = "%b %Y") +
  scale_y_continuous(expand = expansion(c(0, 0.05))) +
  labs(x = "Date", y = "smoothed, day of week adjusted covid-like doctors visits") +

>   theme(legend.position = "none")

Reviewer: You can probably replace some of this with something like the following:

```r
autoplot(
  archive_cases_dv_subset, percent_cli, 
  .versions = seq(ymd("2020-07-01"), ymd("2021-11-30"), by = "1 month"), 
  .mark_versions = TRUE
) +
  scale_x_date(minor_breaks = "month", date_labels = "%b %Y") +
  labs(x = "", y = "% of doctor's visits with\n Covid-like illness") + 
  scale_color_viridis_c(option = "B", end = .8) +
  scale_y_continuous(limits = c(0, NA), expand = expansion(c(0, 0.05))) +
  theme(legend.position = "none")
```

(I detest the rainbow colours.)

Author: Right, this was written before we'd merged that and I forgot to update it.

Incidentally, if we're using inferno, we should probably invert the color scale, since the latest version is black. Including both ^ and that flip in the next commit.

```
</details>

> ```{r plot_just_revisioning, echo = FALSE, warn = FALSE, message = FALSE}

Reviewer: Still an annoying warning in the rendered site.

Author: It appears to have been coming from the earlier codeblock. Should be gone in the next version, but I'll double check before marking as resolved.

Comparing with the grey line tells us how much the value at the time of the
snapshot differs with what was eventually reported.
The drop in January 2021 in the snapshot on `2021-02-01` was initially reported
as much steeper than it eventually turned out to be, while in the period after
that the values were initially reported as higher than they actually were.

Handling data latency is important in both real-time forecasting and retrospective
forecasting.
Looking at the very first snapshot, `2020-08-01` (the red dotted
vertical line), there is a noticeable gap between the forecast date and the end
of the red time-series to its left.
In fact, if we take a snapshot and get the last `time_value`,

```{r}
doctor_visits |>
  epix_as_of(as.Date("2020-08-01")) |>
  pull(time_value) |>
  max()
```

the last day of data is the 25th, a entire week before `2020-08-01`.
This can require some effort to work around, especially if the latency is
variable; see `step_adjust_latency()` for some methods included in this package.
Much of that functionality is built into `arx_forecaster()` using the parameter
`adjust_ahead`, which we will use below.

# Backtesting a simple autoregressive forecaster

> One of the most common use cases of `epiprocess::epi_archive()` object is for

Reviewer: I'd prefer not to call this "the most common use-case". I think (hope?) there's
lots of simpler things that one could do with an archive, so I'd rather not give
the impression that you need to be backtesting forecasters for the functionality
to be useful.

Author: Fair enough. I'm debating listing some of those; outlier detection and nowcasting come to mind, but I'm not sure if it would end up being too much of a digression tot talk about anyways.

accurate model back-testing.

To start, let's use a simple autoregressive forecaster to predict `percent_cli`, the percentage
of doctor's hospital visits associated with COVID-like illness, 14
days in the future. 
For increased accuracy we will use quantile regression.

## Comparing a single day and ahead

As a sanity check before we backtest the _entire_ dataset, let's 
forecast a single day in the middle of the dataset. 

> We can do this by setting the `.version` argument in `epix_slide()`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can do this by setting the `.versions` argument in `epix_slide()`:
```

```{r single_version, warn = FALSE}
forecast_date <- as.Date("2021-04-06")
forecasts <- doctor_visits |>
  epix_slide(
    ~ arx_forecaster(
      .x,
      outcome = "percent_cli",
      predictors = "percent_cli",
      args_list = arx_args_list()
    )$predictions |>
      pivot_quantiles_wider(.pred_distn),
    .versions = forecast_date
  )
```

We need truth data to compare our forecast against. We can construct it by using `epix_as_of()` to snapshot
the archive at the last available date[^1].

_Note:_ We always want to compare our forecasts to actual (most recently reported) values because that is the outcome we care about.

> `as_of` data is useful for understanding why we're getting the forecasts we're getting, but `as_of` values are not the real outcome

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`as_of` data is useful for understanding why we're getting the forecasts we're getting, but `as_of` values are only preliminary outcomes.
```

The `percent_cli` truth data falls within the prediction intervals, so our
implementation passes a simple validation.

## Comparing version faithful and version un-faithful forecasts

Now let's compare the behavior of this forecaster, both properly considering data versioning 
("version faithful") and ignoring data versions ("version un-faithful").

For the version un-faithful approach, we need to do some setup if we want to use `epix_slide` for backtesting.
We want to simulate a data set that receives finalized updates every day, that is, a data set with no revisions.
To do this, we will snapshot the latest version of the data to create a synthetic data set, and convert it into an archive
where `version = time_value`[^2].

```{r}
archive_cases_dv_subset_faux <- doctor_visits |>
  epix_as_of(doctor_visits$versions_end) |>
  mutate(version = time_value) |>
  as_epi_archive()
```

For the version faithful approach, we will continue using the original `epi_archive` object containing all version updates.

We will also create the helper function `forecast_wrapper()` to let us easily map across aheads.

```{r arx-kweek-preliminaries, warning = FALSE}

> forecast_wrapper <- function(

Reviewer: Can we format this chunk a bit better: there's lots of available width. It just
kind of looks funny.

Author: mostly trying to rely on tabs to indicate sub-calls, since it's pretty deeply nested

    mutate(version_faithful = "Version faithful")
)

p1 <- # first plotting the forecasts as bands, lines and points
  ggplot(data = forecasts_filtered, aes(x = target_date, group = time_value)) +
  geom_ribbon(aes(ymin = `0.05`, ymax = `0.95`, fill = factor(time_value)), alpha = 0.4) +
  geom_line(aes(y = .pred, color = factor(time_value)), linetype = 2L) +
  geom_point(aes(y = .pred, color = factor(time_value)), size = 0.75) +
  # the forecast date
  geom_vline(
    data = percent_cli_data |> filter(geo_value == geo_choose) |> select(-version_faithful),
    aes(color = factor(version), xintercept = version),
    lty = 2
  ) +
  # the underlying data
  geom_line(
    data = plotting_data |> filter(geo_value == geo_choose),
    aes(x = time_value, y = percent_cli, color = factor(version)),
    inherit.aes = FALSE, na.rm = TRUE
  ) +
  facet_grid(version_faithful ~ geo_value, scales = "free") +
  scale_x_date(breaks = "2 months", date_labels = "%b %Y") +
  scale_y_continuous(expand = expansion(c(0, 0.05))) +
  labs(x = "Date", y = "smoothed, day of week adjusted covid-like doctors visits") +
  theme(legend.position = "none")
```

> ```{r plot_fl_forecasts, warning = FALSE}

Reviewer: I would strongly prefer a different color scheme.

Author: It's definitely not a great choice. The tricky thing about choosing a color scheme for this plot is that we actually want adjacent dates to be far-ish apart, which is more typical for discrete palettes, but 15 is a lot of colors for those; I guess hue is the default? Anyways, the result for some [Viridis types](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/viridis/vignettes/intro-to-viridis.html):
## Inferno (the one you suggested above)
![tmp](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/38bd3db6-0c8f-43a0-b018-ce2b8146defb)
## Turbo 
Maybe a bit too pastel? but it distinguishes feb/march 2021 better
![turbocardinal](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2b34a7b3-4761-4782-9f68-8040c610c3ed)
## Base Viridis
![viridisOG](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cb8c9161-d07b-4760-a55b-ccbb2b008468)

We should probably port this decision back to epiprocess at some point.

Reviewer: Any of those look fine to me.

geo_choose <- "fl"
forecasts_filtered <- forecasts |>
  filter(geo_value == geo_choose) |>
  mutate(time_value = version)

p2 <-
  ggplot(data = forecasts_filtered, aes(x = target_date, group = time_value)) +
  geom_ribbon(aes(ymin = `0.05`, ymax = `0.95`, fill = factor(time_value)), alpha = 0.4) +
  geom_line(aes(y = .pred, color = factor(time_value)), linetype = 2L) +
  geom_point(aes(y = .pred, color = factor(time_value)), size = 0.75) +
  geom_vline(
    data = percent_cli_data |> filter(geo_value == geo_choose) |> select(-version_faithful),
    aes(color = factor(version), xintercept = version), lty = 2
  ) +
  geom_line(
    data = plotting_data |> filter(geo_value == geo_choose),
    aes(x = time_value, y = percent_cli, color = factor(version)),
    inherit.aes = FALSE, na.rm = TRUE
  ) +
  facet_grid(version_faithful ~ geo_value, scales = "free") +
  scale_x_date(breaks = "2 months", date_labels = "%b %Y") +
  scale_y_continuous(expand = expansion(c(0, 0.05))) +
  labs(x = "Date", y = "smoothed, day of week adjusted covid-like doctors visits") +
  theme(legend.position = "none")
```
</details>

```{r show-plot1, warning = FALSE, echo=FALSE}
p1
```

> The version faithful and un-faithful forecasts look moderately similar except for the 1 day horizons  
> (although neither approach produces amazingly accurate forecasts).

Reviewer: (The extra spaces create a strange looking new line.)
```suggestion
The version faithful and un-faithful forecasts look moderately similar except for the 1 day horizons (although neither approach produces amazingly accurate forecasts).
```

Much of that functionality is built into `arx_forecaster()` using the parameter
`adjust_ahead`, which we will use below.

# Backtesting a simple autoregressive forecaster

One of the most common use cases of `epiprocess::epi_archive()` object is for
accurate model back-testing.

To start, let's use a simple autoregressive forecaster to predict the percentage
of doctor's hospital visits with CLI (COVID-like illness) (`percent_cli`) 14
days in the future. 
For increased accuracy we will use quantile regression.

## Comparing a single day and ahead

As a sanity check before we backtest the entire dataset, let's look at
forecasting a single day in the middle of the dataset. 
One way to do this is by setting the `.version` argument for `epix_slide()`:

```{r single_version, warn = FALSE}
forecast_date <- as.Date("2021-04-06")
forecasts <- doctor_visits |>
  epix_slide(
    ~ arx_forecaster(
      .x,
      outcome = "percent_cli",
      predictors = "percent_cli",
      args_list = arx_args_list()
    )$predictions |>
      pivot_quantiles_wider(.pred_distn),
    .versions = forecast_date
  )
```

As truth data, we'll compare with the `epix_as_of()` to generate a snapshot of

> the archive at the last date[^1].

Author: Primarily to give some sense of the performance of the forecast.

> the archive at the last date[^1].

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I meant why are we comparing to the _finalized_ values and not the as-of values (e.g. a week after the forecast date)?

> the archive at the last date[^1].

Author: So if we're trying to forecast the actual values, we want to compare against finalized data. `as_of` data is useful for understanding why we're getting the forecasts we're getting, but it's not really for evaluating the utility of a forecast. Sometimes revision behavior just wrecks an otherwise decent forecaster. Generally this ties into the discussion below.
